April
April is the fourth month of the year , and comes between March and May .
It is one of four months to have 30 days .
April always begins on the same day of week as July , and additionally , January in leap years .
April always ends on the same day of the week as December .
April 's flowers are the Sweet Pea and Daisy .
Its birthstone is the diamond .
The meaning of the diamond is innocence .
April comes between March and May , making it the fourth month of the year .
It also comes first in the year out of the four months that have 30 days , as June , September and November are later in the year .
April begins on the same day of the week as July every year and on the same day of the week as January in leap years .
April ends on the same day of the week as December every year , as each other 's last days are exactly 35 weeks ( 245 days ) apart .
In common years , April starts on the same day of the week as October of the previous year , and in leap years , May of the previous year .
In common years , April finishes on the same day of the week as July of the previous year , and in leap years , February and October of the previous year .
In common years immediately after other common years , April starts on the same day of the week as January of the previous year , and in leap years and years immediately after that , April finishes on the same day of the week as January of the previous year .
In years immediately before common years , April starts on the same day of the week as September and December of the following year , and in years immediately before leap years , June of the following year .
In years immediately before common years , April finishes on the same day of the week as September of the following year , and in years immediately before leap years , March and June of the following year .
April is a spring month in the Northern Hemisphere and an autumn/fall month in the Southern Hemisphere .
In each hemisphere , it is the seasonal equivalent of October in the other .
It is unclear as to where April got its name .
A common theory is that it comes from the Latin word `` aperire '' , meaning `` to open '' , referring to flowers opening in spring .
Another theory is that the name could come from Aphrodite , the Greek goddess of love .
It was originally the second month in the old Roman Calendar , before the start of the new year was put to January 1 .
Quite a few festivals are held in this month .
In many Southeast Asian cultures , new year is celebrated in this month ( including Songkran ) .
In Western Christianity , Easter can be celebrated on a Sunday between March 22 and April 25 .
In Orthodox Christianity , it can fall between April 4 and May 8 .
At the end of the month , Central and Northern European cultures celebrate Walpurgis Night on April 30 , marking the transition from winter into summer .
Poets use `` April '' to mean the end of winter .
For example : `` April showers bring May flowers . ''
August
August ( Aug. ) is the eighth month of the year in the Gregorian calendar , coming between July and September .
It has 31 days , the same number of days as the previous month , July , and is named after Roman Emperor Augustus Caesar .
August does n't begin on the same day of the week as any other month in common years , but begins on the same day of the week as February in leap years .
August always ends on the same day of the week as November .
This month was first called `` Sextilis '' in Latin , because it was the sixth month in the old Roman calendar .
The Roman calendar began in March about 735 BC with Romulus .
October was the eighth month .
August was the eighth month when January or February were added to the start of the year by King Numa Pompilius about 700 BC .
Or , when those two months were moved from the end to the beginning of the year by the decemvirs about 450 BC ( Roman writers disagree ) .
In 153 BC January 1 was determined as the beginning of the year .
August is named for Augustus Caesar who became Roman consul in this month .
The month has 31 days because Julius Caesar added two days when he created the Julian calendar in 45 BC .
August is after July and before September .
August , in either hemisphere , is the seasonal equivalent of February in the other .
In the Northern hemisphere it is a summer month and it is a winter month in the Southern hemisphere .
No other month in common years begins on the same day of the week as August , but August begins on the same day of the week as February in leap years .
August ends on the same day of the week as November every year , as each other 's last days are 13 weeks ( 91 days ) apart .
In common years , August starts on the same day of the week as March and November of the previous year , and in leap years , June of the previous year .
In common years , August finishes on the same day of the week as March and June of the previous year , and in leap years , September of the previous year .
In common years immediately after other common years , August starts on the same day of the week as February of the previous year .
In years immediately before common years , August starts on the same day of the week as May of the following year , and in years immediately before leap years , October of the following year .
In years immediately before common years , August finishes on the same day of the week as May of the following year , and in years immediately before leap years , February and October of the following year .
Art
Art is a creative activity that expresses imaginative or technical skill It produces a product , an object.Art is a diverse range of human activities in creating visual , performing artifacts , expressing the author 's imaginative mind .
The product of art is called a work of art , for others to experience .
Some art is useful in a practical sense , such as a sculptured clay bowl that can be used .
That kind of art is sometimes called a `` craft '' .
Those who make art are called artists .
They hope to affect the emotions of people who experience it .
Some people find art relaxing , exciting or informative .
Some say people are driven to make art due to their inner creativity .
`` The arts '' is a much broader term .
It includes drawing , painting , sculpting , photography , performance art , dance , music , poetry , prose and theatre .
Art is divided into the plastic arts , where something is made , and the performing arts , where something is done by humans in action .
The other division is between pure arts , done for themselves , and practical arts , done for a practical purpose , but with artistic content .
Some people say that art is a product or item that is made with the intention of stimulating the human senses as well as the human mind , spirit and soul .
An artwork is normally judged by how much impact it has on people , the number of people who can relate to it , and how much they appreciate it .
Some people also get inspired .
The first and broadest sense of `` art '' means `` arrangement '' or `` to arrange . ''
In this sense , art is created when someone arranges things found in the world into a new or different design or form ; or when someone arranges colors next to each other in a painting to make an image or just to make a pretty or interesting design .
Art may express emotion .
Artists may feel a certain emotion and wish to express it by creating something that means something to them .
Most of the art created in this case is made for the artist rather than an audience .
However , if an audience is able to connect with the emotion as well , then the art work may become publicly successful .
There are sculptures , cave painting and rock art dating from the Upper Paleolithic era .
All of the great ancient civilizations , such as Ancient Egypt , India , China , Greece , Rome and Persia had works and styles of art .
In the Middle Ages , most of the art in Europe showed people from the Bible in paintings , stained glass windows , and mosaic tile floors and walls .
Islamic art includes geometric patterns , Islamic calligraphy , and architecture .
In India and Tibet , painted sculptures , dance , and religious painting were done .
In China , arts included jade carving , bronze , pottery , poetry , calligraphy , music , painting , drama , and fiction .
There are many Chinese artistic styles , which are usually named after the ruling dynasty .
In Europe , after the Middle Ages , there was a `` Renaissance '' which means `` rebirth '' .
People rediscovered science and artists were allowed to paint subjects other than religious subjects .
People like Michelangelo and Leonardo da Vinci still painted religious pictures , but they also now could paint mythological pictures too .
These artists also invented perspective where things in the distance look smaller in the picture .
This was new because in the Middle Ages people would paint all the figures close up and just overlapping each other .
In the late 1800s , artists in Europe , responding to Modernity created many new painting styles such as Classicism , Romanticism , Realism , and Impressionism .
The history of twentieth century art includes Expressionism , Fauvism , Cubism , Dadaism , Surrealism , and Minimalism .
In some societies , people think that art belongs to the person who made it .
They think that the artist put his or her `` talent '' and industry into the art .
In this view , the art is the property of the artist , protected by copyright .
In other societies , people think that art belongs to no one .
They think that society has put its social capital into the artist and the artist 's work .
In this view , society is a collective that has made the art , through the artist .
The functions of art include :
1 ) Cognitive function
2 ) Aesthetic function
3 ) Prognostic function
4 ) Recreation function
5 ) Value function
6 ) Didactic function
A
A or a is the first letter of the English alphabet .
The small letter , a or α , is used as a lower case vowel .
When it is spoken , ā is said as a long a , a diphthong of ĕ and y .
A is similar to alpha of the Greek alphabet .
That is not surprising , because it stands for the same sound .
`` Alpha and omega '' ( the last letter of the Greek alphabet ) means from beginning to the end .
In musical notation , the letter A is the symbol of a note in the scale , below B and above G. In binary numbers , the letter A is 01000001 .
A is the letter that was used to represent a team in an old TV show , The A-Team .
A capital a is written `` A '' .
Use a capital a at the start of a sentence if writing .
The letter ' A ' was in the Phoenician alphabet 's aleph .
This symbol came from a simple picture of an ox head .
This Phoenician letter helped make the basic blocks of later types of the letter .
The Greeks later modified this letter and used it as their letter alpha .
The Greek alphabet was used by the Etruscans in northern Italy , and the Romans later modified the Etruscan alphabet for their own language .
The letter A has six different sounds .
It can sound like æ , in the International Phonetic Alphabet , such as the word `` pad '' .
Other sounds of this letter are in the words `` father '' , which developed into another sound , such as in the word `` ace '' .
In algebra , the letter `` A '' along with other letters at the beginning of the alphabet is used to represent known quantities .
In geometry , capital A , B , C etc .
are used to label line segments , lines , etc .
Also , A is typically used as one of the letters to label an angle in a triangle .
Air
Air is the Earth 's atmosphere .
Air around us is a mixture of many gases and dust particles .
It is the clear gas in which living things live and breathe .
It has an indefinite shape and volume .
It has no colour or smell .
It has mass and weight , because it is matter .
The weight of air creates atmospheric pressure .
There is no air in outer space .
Air is a mixture of about 78 % of nitrogen , 21 % of oxygen , 0.9 % of argon , 0.04 % of carbon dioxide , and very small amounts of other gases .
There is an average of about 1 % water vapour .
Animals live and need to breathe the oxygen in the air .
In breathing , the lungs put oxygen into the blood , and send back carbon dioxide to the air .
Plants need the carbon dioxide in the air to live .
They give off the oxygen that we breathe .
Without it we die of asphyxia .
Wind is moving air .
This causes weather .
Air can be polluted by some gases ( such as carbon monoxide ) , smoke , and ash .
This air pollution causes various problems including smog , acid rain and global warming .
It can damage people 's health .
Aircraft use propellers to move air over a wing , which allows them to fly .
Pneumatics use air pressure to move things .
Air can not be seen by the eye .
Autonomous communities of Spain
Spain is divided in 17 parts called autonomous communities .
`` Autonomous '' means that each of these autonomous communities has its own executive , legislative judicial powers .
These are similar to , but `` not '' the same as , states in the United States of America , for example .
Spain has fifty smaller parts called provinces .
In 1978 these parts came together , making the autonomous communities .
Before then , some of these provinces were together but were broken .
The groups that were together once before are called `` historic communities '' : Catalonia , Basque Country , Galicia and Andalusia .
The Spanish language is the sole official language in every autonomous community but six , where Spanish is co-official with other languages , as follows :
List of the autonomous communities , with their Capital city ( the place where the government has its offices ) :
Spain also has two cities on the north coast of Africa : Ceuta and Melilla .
They are called `` autonomous cities '' and have simultaneously the majority of the power of an autonomous community and also power of provinces and power of municipalities .
Alan Turing
Alan Mathison Turing OBE FRS ( London , 23 June 1912 – Wilmslow , Cheshire , 7 June 1954 ) was an English mathematician and computer scientist .
He was born in Maida Vale , London .
Alan Turing was born in Maida Vale , London on 23 June 1912 .
His father was part of a family of merchants from Scotland .
His mother , Ethel Sara , was the daughter of an engineer .
Turing went to St. Michael 's , a school at 20 Charles Road , St Leonards-on-sea , when he was five years old .
`` This is only a foretaste of what is to come , and only the shadow of what is going to be. ” – Alan Turing .
The Stoney family were once prominent landlords , here in North Tipperary .
His mother Ethel Sara Stoney ( 1881–1976 ) was daughter of Edward Waller Stoney ( Borrisokane , North Tipperary ) and Sarah Crawford ( Cartron Abbey , Co. Longford ) ; Protestant Anglo-Irish gentry .
Educated in Dublin at Alexandra School and College ; on October 1st 1907 she married Julius Mathison Turing , latter son of Reverend John Robert Turing and Fanny Boyd , in Dublin .
Born on June 23rd 1912 , Alan Turing would go on to be regarded as one of the greatest figures of the twentieth century .
A brilliant mathematician and cryptographer Alan was to become the founder of modern-day computer science and artificial intelligence ; designing a machine at Bletchley Park to break secret Enigma encrypted messages used by the Nazi German war machine to protect sensitive commercial , diplomatic and military communications during World War 2 .
Thus , Turing made the single biggest contribution to the Allied victory in the war against Nazi Germany , possibly saving the lives of an estimated 2 million people , through his effort in shortening World War II .
In 2013 , almost 60 years later , Turing received a posthumous Royal Pardon from Queen Elizabeth II .
Today , the “ Turing law ” grants an automatic pardon to men who died before the law came into force , making it possible for living convicted gay men to seek pardons for offences now no longer on the statute book .
Alas , Turing accidentally or otherwise lost his life in 1954 , having been subjected by a British court to chemical castration , thus avoiding a custodial sentence .
He is known to have ended his life at the age of 41 years , by eating an apple laced with cyanide
Turing was one of the people who worked on the first computers .
He created the theoretical Turing machine in 1936 .
The machine was imaginary , but it included the idea of a computer program .
Turing was interested in artificial intelligence .
He proposed the Turing test , to say when a machine could be called `` intelligent '' .
A computer could be said to `` think '' if a human talking with it could not tell it was a machine .
During World War II , Turing worked with others to break German ciphers ( secret messages ) .
He worked for the Government Code and Cypher School ( GC & CS ) at Bletchley Park , Britain 's codebreaking centre that produced Ultra intelligence .
Using cryptanalysis , he helped to break the codes of the Enigma machine .
After that , he worked on other German codes .
From 1945 to 1947 , Turing worked on the design of the ACE ( Automatic Computing Engine ) at the National Physical Laboratory .
He presented a paper on 19 February 1946 .
That paper was `` the first detailed design of a stored-program computer '' .
Although it was possible to build ACE , there were delays in starting the project .
In late 1947 he returned to Cambridge for a sabbatical year .
While he was at Cambridge , the Pilot ACE was built without him .
It ran its first program on 10 May 1950 .
Turing was a homosexual man .
In 1952 , he admitted having had sex with a man in England .
At that time , homosexual acts were illegal .
Turing was convicted .
He had to choose between going to jail and taking hormones to lower his sex drive .
He decided to take the hormones .
After his punishment , he became impotent .
He also grew breasts .
In May 2012 , a private member 's bill was put before the House of Lords to grant Turing a statutory pardon .
In July 2013 , the government supported it .
A royal pardon was granted on 24 December 2013 .
In 1954 , Turing died from cyanide poisoning .
The cyanide came from either an apple which was poisoned with cyanide , or from water that had cyanide in it .
The reason for the confusion is that the police never tested the apple for cyanide .
It is also suspected that he committed suicide .
The treatment forced on him is now believed to be very wrong .
It is against medical ethics and international laws of human rights .
In August 2009 , a petition asking the British Government to apologise to Turing for punishing him for being a homosexual was started .
The petition received thousands of signatures .
Prime Minister Gordon Brown acknowledged the petition .
He called Turing 's treatment `` appalling '' .
Alanis Morissette
Alanis Nadine Morissette ( born 1 June 1974 ) is a Grammy Award-winning Canadian-American singer and songwriter .
She was born in Ottawa , Canada .
She began singing in Canada as a teenager in 1990 .
In 1995 , she became popular all over the world .
As a young child in Canada , Morissette began to act on television , including 5 episodes of the long-running series , `` You Ca n't Do That on Television '' .
Her first album was released only in Canada in 1990 .
Her first international album was `` Jagged Little Pill '' , released in 1995 .
It was a rock-influenced album .
`` Jagged '' has sold more than 33 million units globally .
It became the best-selling debut album in music history .
Her next album , `` Supposed Former Infatuation Junkie '' , was released in 1998 .
It was a success as well .
Morissette took up producing duties for her next albums , which include `` Under Rug Swept '' , `` So-Called Chaos '' and `` Flavors of Entanglement '' .
Morissette has sold more than 60 million albums worldwide .
She also acted in several movies , including Kevin Smith 's `` Dogma '' , where she played God .
Alanis Morissette 's father is French-Canadian .
Her mother is from Hungary .
She has an older brother , Chad , and a twin brother , Wade , who is 12 minutes younger than she is .
Her parents had worked as teachers at a military base in Lahr , Germany .
Morissette became an American citizen in 2005 .
She is still Canadian citizen .
On May 22 , 2010 , Morissette married rapper Mario “ MC Souleye ” Treadway .
Morissette has had many albums .
Her 1995 album `` Jagged Little Pill '' became a very popular album .
It has sold over 30 million copies worldwide .
The album caused Morissette to win four Grammy Awards .
The album `` Jagged Little Pill '' touched many people .
On the album , Morissette sang songs about many different things .
These things include :
Morissette has written many songs .
Some of her most famous songs are :
Adobe Illustrator
Adobe Illustrator is a computer program for making graphic design and illustrations .
It is made by Adobe Systems .
Pictures created in `` Adobe Illustrator '' can be made bigger or smaller , and look exactly the same at any size .
It works well with the rest of the products with the Adobe name .
It was first released in 1986 for the Apple Macintosh .
The latest version is Adobe Illustrator CS6 , part of Creative Suite 6 .
Andouille
Andouille is a type of pork sausage .
It is spicy ( hot in taste ) and smoked .
There are different kinds , all with different combinations of pork meat , fat , intestines ( tubes going to the stomach ) , and tripe ( the wall of the stomach ) .
Andouille sausage first came from France or Germany ( no-one is sure ) , but the name indicates that it may have come out from France , and the most famous sort in the USA is the `` Cajun '' style .
Other sorts are `` French andouille '' and `` German andouille '' ; they are less spicy than Cajun .
Cajun has extra salt , black pepper , and garlic .
Andouille makers smoke the sausages over pecan wood and sugar cane for a maximum of seven or eight hours , at about 175 degrees Fahrenheit ( 80 degrees Celsius ) .
Farming
Farming is growing crops or keeping animals by people for food and raw materials .
Farming is a part of agriculture .
Agriculture started thousands of years ago , but no one knows for sure how old it is .
The development of farming gave rise to the Neolithic Revolution whereby people gave up nomadic hunting and became settlers in what became cities .
Agriculture and domestication probably started in the Fertile Crescent ( the Nile Valley , The Levant and Mesopotamia ) .
The area called Fertile Crescent is now in the countries of Iraq , Syria , Turkey , Jordan , Lebanon , Israel , and Egypt .
Wheat and barley are some of the first crops people grew .
People probably started agriculture slowly by planting a few crops , but still gathered many foods from the wild .
People may have started farming because the weather and soil began to change .
Farming can feed many more people than hunter-gatherers can feed on the same amount of land .
Agriculture is not only growing food for people and animals , but also growing other things like flowers and nursery plants , manure or dung , animal hides ( skins or furs ) , leather , animals , fungi , fibers ( cotton , wool , hemp , and flax ) , biofuels , and drugs ( biopharmaceuticals , marijuana , opium ) .
Many people still live by subsistence agriculture , on a small farm .
They can only grow enough food to feed the farmer , his family , and his animals .
The yield is the amount of food grown on a given amount of land , and it is often low .
This is because subsistence farmers are generally less educated , and they have less money to buy equipment .
Drought and other problems sometimes cause famines .
Where yields are low , deforestation can provide new land to grow more food .
This provides more nutrition for the farmer 's family , but can be bad for the country and the surrounding environment over many years .
In rich countries , farms are often fewer and larger .
During the 20th century they have become more productive because farmers are able to grow better varieties of plants , use more fertilizer , use more water , and more easily control weeds and pests .
Many farms also use machines , so fewer people can farm more land .
There are fewer farmers in rich countries , but the farmers are able to grow more .
This kind of intensive agriculture comes with its own set of problems .
Farmers use a lot of chemical fertilizers , pesticides ( chemicals that kill bugs ) , and herbicides ( chemicals that kill weeds ) .
These chemicals can pollute the soil or the water .
They can also create bugs and weeds that are more resistant to the chemicals , causing outbreaks of these pests .
The soil can be damaged by erosion ( blowing or washing away ) , salt buildup , or loss of structure .
Irrigation ( adding water from rivers ) can pollute water and lower the water table .
These problems have all got solutions , and modern young farmers usually have a good technical education .
Farmers select plants with better yield , taste , and nutritional value .
They also choose plants that can survive plant disease and drought , and are easier to harvest .
Centuries of artificial selection and breeding have had enormous effects on the characteristics of crop plants .
The crops produce better yield with other techniques ( use of fertilizers , chemical pest control , irrigation ) .
Some companies have been searching for new plants in poor countries , and genetically modify these plants to improve them .
They then try to patent the seeds and sell them back to the poor countries .
New plants were created with genetic engineering .
One example of genetic engineering is modifying a plant to resist a herbicide .
It is important for there to be enough food for everyone .
The food must also be safe and good .
People say it is not always safe , because it contains some chemicals .
Other people say intensive agriculture is damaging the environment .
For this reason , there are several types of agriculture .
Agricultural policy focuses on the goals and methods of agricultural production .
Common goals of policy include the quality , amount , and safety of food .
There are some serious problems that people face trying to grow food today .
These include :
The major crops produced in the world in 2002 , are maize ( corn ) , wheat , rice , and cotton .
`` See also '' : List of vegetables , List of herbs , List of fruit
Arithmetic
Arithmetic is a name for working with numbers .
It is a part of mathematics .
The four basic arithmetic operations are addition , subtraction , multiplication , and division .
Harder arithmetic includes working with signed numbers , fractions , and decimals , and taking powers and roots .
Most people learn arithmetic in primary school , but some people do not learn arithmetic and others forget the arithmetic they learned .
Many jobs require a knowledge of arithmetic , and many employers complain that it is hard to find people who know enough arithmetic .
A few of the many jobs that require arithmetic include carpenters , plumbers , auto mechanics , accountants , architects , doctors , and nurses .
Arithmetic is needed in all areas of mathematics , science , and engineering .
A calculator can be used to do arithmetic .
Computers can do it more quickly , which is one reason Global Positioning System receivers have a small computer inside .
Addition
Addition is a mathematical way of putting things together .
In arithmetic , addition is finding the total of two or more numbers .
The sign for addition is `` + '' .
The name for the sign `` + '' is `` plus '' .
Another name for the total is the sum .
For example , there are objects in two groups .
The objects are small circles : `` o '' .
One group has five of these objects .
The other group has 3 of these objects .
To find the total number of objects in both groups , the objects can be counted .
Another way to find the number of objects in both groups is to add the numbers in each group .
Another method is to add the numbers of objects in group A and group B , since they are already counted .
In symbols :
There are rules for adding numbers that people learn .
There are also rules for adding numbers that are built into machines ( binary adder ) .
The rule says that :
In another counting example , Sally and Bill have 2 children .
Sally and Bill get 3 more children .
Sally and Bill have added three children to their two children and now have five children .
Vertical Addition
The animation above demonstrates the addition of seven hundred and eighty six and four hundred and sixty seven , the problems digits have been separated into units , tens and hundreds ( place value ) .
First the units 6 and 7 are added together to make 13 , so 1 ten and 3 units , the 3 is written below and the 1 ten is carried to the tens column .
Next in the tens column the 1 , 8 and 6 are added together to make 15 tens , so 1 hundred and 5 tens , the 5 is written below and the 1 hundred is carried to the hundreds column .
Finally in the hundreds column 1 , 7 and 4 are added together to make 12 hundreds , so 1 thousand and 2 hundreds , the 2 is written below and the 1 thousand is carried to the thousand column .
Giving the answer one thousand two hundred and fifty three .
Tom wants to know the distance between his house and Sally 's house .
Bob 's house is 300 meters east of Tom 's house .
Sally 's house is 120 meters east of Bob 's house :
The distance from Tom 's house to Sally 's house can be found by adding the distances already measured .
The distance from Tom 's house to Bob 's house added to the distance from Bob 's house to Sally 's house is the same as the distance from Tom 's house to Sally 's house .
That is , three hundred ( 300 ) meters plus 120 meters .
Addition can also mean to make bigger .
Australia
Australia , formally the Commonwealth of Australia , is a country and sovereign state in the southern hemisphere , located in Oceania .
Its capital city is Canberra , and its largest city is Sydney .
Australia is the sixth biggest country in the world by land area , and is part of the Oceanic and Australasian regions .
Australia , New Zealand , New Guinea and other islands on the Australian tectonic plate are together called Australasia , which is one of the world 's great ecozones .
When other Pacific islands are included with Australasia , it is called Oceania .
25 million people live in Australia , and about 85 % of them live near the east coast .
The country is divided up into six states and two territories , and more than half of Australia 's population lives in and around the cities of Sydney , Melbourne , Brisbane , Perth and Adelaide .
Australia is known for its mining ( coal , iron , gold , diamonds and crystals ) , its production of wool , and as the world 's largest producer of bauxite .
Its emblem is a flower called the Golden Wattle .
Australia 's landmass of 7,617,930 square kilometers is on the Indo-Australian plate .
The continent of Australia , including the island of Tasmania , was separated from the other continents of the world many millions of years ago .
Because of this , many animals and plants live in Australia that do not live anywhere else .
These include animals like the kangaroo , the koala , the emu , the kookaburra , and the platypus .
People first arrived in Australia more than 50,000 years ago .
These native Australians are called the Australian Aborigines .
For the history of Australia , see History of Australia .
Most of the Australian colonies , having been settled from Britain , became mostly independent democratic states in the 1850s and all six combined as a federation on 1 January 1901 .
The first Prime Minister of Australia was Edmund Barton in 1901 .
Australia is a member of the United Nations and the Commonwealth of Nations .
It is a parliamentary democracy and a constitutional monarchy with Elizabeth II as Queen of Australia and Head of State and a Governor-General who is chosen by the Prime Minister to carry out all the duties of the Queen in Australia .
Australia has six states , two major mainland territories , and other minor territories .
The states are New South Wales , Queensland , South Australia , Tasmania , Victoria , and Western Australia .
The two major mainland territories are the Northern Territory and the Australian Capital Territory ( ACT ) .
In 2013 according to world bank Australia had just over 23.13 million people .
Most Australians live in cities along the coast , such as Sydney , Melbourne , Brisbane , Perth , Darwin , Hobart and Adelaide .
The largest inland city is Canberra , which is also the nation 's capital .
The largest city is Sydney .
Australia is a very big country , but much of the land is very dry , and the middle of the continent is mostly desert .
Only the areas around the east , west and south coast have enough rain and a suitable climate ( not too hot ) for many farms and cities .
The Australian Aboriginal people arrived in Australia about 50,000 years ago or even earlier .
Until the arrival of British settlers in 1788 , the Aboriginal people lived by hunting and gathering food from the land .
They lived in all sorts of climates and managed the land in different ways .
An example of Aboriginal land management was the Cumberland Plain where Sydney is now .
Every few years the Aboriginal people would burn the grass and small trees .
This meant that a lot of grass grew back , but not many big trees .
Kangaroos like to live on grassy plains , but not in forests .
The kangaroos that lived on the plain were a good food supply for the Aboriginal people .
Sometimes , Aborigines would name a person after an animal , and they could not eat that animal to help level out the food population .
Aboriginal people did not usually build houses , except huts of grass , leaves and bark .
They did not usually build walls or fences , and there were no horses , cows or sheep in Australia that needed to be kept in pens .
The only Aboriginal buildings that are known are fish-traps made from stones piled up in the river , and the remains of a few stone huts in Victoria and Tasmania .
The Aboriginal people did not use metal or make pottery or use bows and arrows or weave cloth .
In some parts of Australia the people used sharp flaked-stone spearheads , but most Aboriginal spears were made of sharply pointed wood .
Australia has a lot of trees that have very hard wood that was good for spear making .
The boomerang was used in some areas for sport and for hunting .
The Aboriginal people did not think that the land belonged to them .
They believed that they had grown from the land , so it was like their mother , and they belonged to the land .
In the 1600s , Dutch merchants traded with the islands of Batavia ( now Indonesia ) , to the north of Australia and several different Dutch ships touched on the coast of Australia .
The Dutch governor , van Diemen , sent Abel Tasman on a voyage of discovery and he found Tasmania , which he named Van Diemen 's Land .
Its name was later changed to honour the man who discovered it .
The British Government was sure that there must be a very large land in the south , that had not been explored .
They sent Captain James Cook to the Pacific Ocean .
His ship , `` HMS Endeavour '' , carried the famous scientists , Sir Joseph Banks and Dr Solander who were going to Tahiti where they would watch the planet Venus pass in front of the Sun .
Captain Cook 's secret mission was to find `` Terra Australis '' ( the Land of the South ) .
The voyage of discovery was very successful , because they found New Zealand and sailed right around it .
Then they sailed westward .
At last , a boy , William Hicks , who was up the mast spotted land on the horizon .
Captain Cook named that bit of land Point Hicks .
They sailed up the coast and Captain Cook named the land that he saw `` New South Wales '' .
At last they sailed into a large open bay which was full of fish and stingrays which the sailors speared for food .
Joseph Banks and Dr. Solander went ashore and were astonished to find that they did not know what any of the plants or birds or animals that they saw were .
They collected hundreds of plants to take back to England .
Captain Cook saw the Aboriginal people with their simple way of life .
He saw them fishing and hunting and collecting grass seeds and fruit .
But there were no houses and no fences .
In most parts of the world , people put up a house and a fence or some marker to show that they own the land .
But the Aboriginal people did not own the land in that way .
They belonged to the land , like a baby belongs to its mother .
Captain Cook went home to England and told the government that no-one owned the land .
This would later cause a terrible problem for the Aboriginal people .
In the 1700s , in England , laws were tough , many people were poor and gaols ( jails ) were full .
A person could be sentenced to death for stealing a loaf of bread .
Many people were hung for small crimes .
But usually they were just thrown in gaol .
Often they were sent away to the British colonies in America .
But by the 1770s , the colonies in America became the United States .
They were free from British rule and would not take England 's convicts any more , so England needed to find a new and less populated place .
By the 1780s the gaols of England were so full that convicts were often chained up in rotting old ships .
The government decided to make a settlement in New South Wales and send some of the convicts there .
In 1788 the First Fleet of eleven ships set sail from Portsmouth carrying convicts , sailors , marines , a few free settlers and enough food to last for two years .
Their leader was Captain Arthur Phillip .
They were to make a new colony at the place that Captain Cook had discovered , named Botany Bay because of all the unknown plants found there by the two scientists .
Captain Phillip found that Botany Bay was flat and windy .
There was not much fresh water .
He went with two ships up the coast and sailed into a great harbor which he said was `` the finest harbor in the world ! ''
There were many small bays on the harbor so he decided on one which had a good stream of fresh water and some flat shore to land on .
On 26 January 1788 , the flag was raised and New South Wales was claimed in the name of King George III of England , and the new settlement was called Sydney .
For the first few years of the settlement , things were very difficult .
No-one in the British Government had thought very hard about what sort of convicts should be sent to make a new colony .
Nobody had chosen them carefully .
There was only one man who was a farmer .
There was no-one among the convicts who was a builder , a brick-maker or a blacksmith .
No-one knew how to fix the tools when they broke .
All of the cattle escaped .
There were no cooking pots .
All the plants were different so no-one knew which ones could be eaten .
It was probable that everyone in the new colony would die of starvation .
Somehow , the little group of tents with a hut for the Governor , Arthur Phillip , and another hut for the supply of food , grew into a small town with streets , a bridge over the stream , a windmill for grinding grain and wharves for ships .
By the 1820s there was a fine brick house for the Governor .
There was also a hospital and a convict barracks and a beautiful church which are still standing today .
Settlements had spread out from Sydney , firstly to Norfolk Island and to Van Diemen 's Land ( Tasmania ) , and also up the coast to Newcastle , where coal was discovered , and inland where the missing cattle were found to have grown to a large herd .
Spanish Merino sheep had been brought to Sydney , and by 1820 , farmers were raising fat lambs for meat and also sending fine wool back to the factories of England .
While the settlement was growing in New South Wales , it was also growing in Tasmania .
The climate in Tasmania was more like that in England , and farmers found it easy to grow crops there .
Because Australia is such a very large land , it was easy to think that it might be able to hold a very large number of people .
In the early days of the colony , a great number of explorers went out , searching for good land to settle on .
When the settlers looked west from Sydney , they saw a range of mountains which they called the Blue Mountains .
They were not very high and did not look very rugged but for many years no-one could find their way through them .
In 1813 Gregory Blaxland , William Lawson and a 17-year-old called William Charles Wentworth crossed the Blue Mountains and found land on the other side which was good for farming .
A road was built and the governor , Lachlan Macquarie founded the town of Bathurst on the other side , 100 miles from Sydney .
Some people , like Captain Charles Sturt were sure that there must be a sea in the middle of Australia and set out to find it .
Many of the explorers did not prepare very well , or else they went out to explore at the hottest time of year .
Some died like Burke and Wills .
Ludwig Leichhardt got lost twice .
The second time , he was never seen again .
Major Thomas Mitchell was one of the most successful explorers .
He mapped the country as he went , and his maps remained in use for more than 100 years .
He travelled all the way to what is now western Victoria , and to his surprise and annoyance found that he was not the first white person there .
The Henty brothers had come from Tasmania , had built themselves a house , had a successful farm and fed the Major and his men on roast lamb and wine .
The gold rushes of New South Wales and Victoria started in 1851 leading to large numbers of people arriving to search for gold .
The population grew across south east Australia and made great wealth and industry .
By 1853 the gold rushes had made some poor people , very rich .
The transportation of convicts to Australia ended in the 1840s and 1850s and more changes came .
The people in Australia wanted to run their own country , and not be told what to do from London .
The first governments in the colonies were run by governors chosen by London .
Soon the settlers wanted local government and more democracy .
William Wentworth started the Australian Patriotic Association ( Australia 's first political party ) in 1835 to demand democratic government .
In 1840 , the city councils started and some people could vote .
New South Wales Legislative Council had its first elections in 1843 , again with some limits on who could vote .
In 1855 , limited self-government was given by London to New South Wales , Victoria , South Australia and Tasmania .
In 1855 , the right to vote was given to all men over 21 in South Australia .
The other colonies soon followed .
Women were given the vote in the Parliament of South Australia in 1895 and they became the first women in the world allowed to stand in elections .
Australians had started parliamentary democracies all across the continent .
But voices were getting louder for all of them to come together as one country with a national parliament .
Until 1901 , Australia was not a nation , it was six separate colonies governed by Britain .
They voted to join together to form one new country , called the Commonwealth of Australia , in 1901 .
Australia was still part of the British Empire , and at first wanted only British or Europeans to come to Australia .
But soon it had its own money , and its own Army and Navy .
In Australia at this time , the trade unions were very strong , and they started a political party , the Australian Labor Party .
Australia passed many laws to help the workers .
In 1914 , the First World War started in Europe .
Australia joined in on the side of Britain against Germany , Austria-Hungary and the Ottoman Empire .
Australian soldiers were sent to Gallipoli , in the Ottoman Empire .
They fought bravely , but were beaten by the Turks .
Today Australia remembers this battle every year on ANZAC Day .
They also fought on the Western Front .
More than 60,000 Australians were killed .
Australia had a really hard time in the Great Depression of the 1930s and joined Britain in a war against Nazi Germany when Hitler invaded Poland in 1939 .
But in 1941 lots of Australian soldiers were captured in the Fall of Singapore by Japan .
Then Japan started attacking Australia and people worried about invasion .
But with help from the United States Navy , the Japanese were stopped .
After the war , Australia became a close friend of the United States .
When the war ended , Australia felt that it needed many more people to fill the country up and to work .
So the government said it would take in people from Europe who had lost their homes in the war .
It did things like building the Snowy Mountains Scheme .
Over the next 25 years , millions of people came to Australia .
They came especially from Italy and Greece , other countries in Europe .
Later they also came from countries like Turkey and Lebanon .
An important new party , the Liberal Party of Australia was made by Robert Menzies in 1944 and it won lots of elections from 1949 until in 1972 , then Gough Whitlam won for the Labor Party .
Whitlam made changes , but he made the Senate unhappy and the Governor-General sacked him and forced an election in 1975 .
Then Malcolm Fraser won a few elections for the Liberal Party .
In the 1960s many people began coming to Australia from China , Vietnam , Malaysia and other countries in Asia .
Australia became more multicultural .
In the 1950s and 1960s Australia became one of the richest countries in the world , helped by mining and wool .
Australia started trading more with America , than Japan .
Australia supported the United States in wars against dictatorships in Korea and Vietnam and later Iraq .
Australian soldiers also helped the United Nations in countries like East Timor in 1999 .
In 1973 , the famous Sydney Opera House opened .
In the 1970s , 80s and 90s lots of Australian movies , actors and singers became famous around the world .
In the year 2000 , Sydney had the Summer Olympics .
In the 1980s and 90s , the Labor Party under Bob Hawke and Paul Keating , then the Liberal Party under John Howard made lots of changes to the economy .
Australia had a bad recession in 1991 , but when other Western countries had trouble with their economies in 2008 , Australia stayed strong .
Today Australia is a rich , peaceful and democratic country .
But it still has problems .
Around 4-5 % of Australians could not get a job in 2010 .
A lot of land in Australia ( like Uluru ) has been returned to Aboriginal people , but lots of Aborigines are still poorer than everybody else .
Every year the government chooses a big number of new people from all around the world to come as immigrants to live in Australia .
These people may come because they want to do business , or to live in a democracy , to join their family , or because they are refugees .
Australia took 6.5 million immigrants in the 60 years after World War Two , including around 660,000 refugees .
Julia Gillard became the first woman Prime Minister of Australia in 2010 when she replaced her colleague Kevin Rudd of the Labor Party .
Australia is made up of six states , and two mainland territories .
Each state and territory has its own Parliament and makes its own local laws .
The Parliament of Australia sits in Canberra and makes laws for the whole country , also known as the Commonwealth or Federation .
The Federal government is led by the Prime Minister of Australia , who is the member of Parliament chosen as leader .
The current Prime Minister is Scott Morrison .
The leader of Australia is the Prime Minister , although the Governor-General represents the Queen of Australia , who is also the Queen of Great Britain , as head of state .
The Governor-General , currently His Excellency David Hurley , is chosen by the Prime Minister .
Australia was colonised by people from Britain , but today people from all over the world live there .
English is the main spoken language , and Christianity is the main religion , though all religions are accepted and not everybody has a religion .
Australia is multicultural , which means that all its people are encouraged to keep their different languages , religions and ways of life , while also learning English and joining in with other Australians .
Famous Australian writers include the bush balladeers Banjo Paterson and Henry Lawson who wrote about life in the Australian bush .
More modern famous writers include Peter Carey , Thomas Keneally and Colleen McCullough .
In 1973 , Patrick White won the Nobel Prize in Literature , the only Australian to have achieved this ; he is seen as one of the great English-language writers of the twentieth century .
Australian music has had lots of world-wide stars , for example the opera singers Nellie Melba and Joan Sutherland , the rock and roll bands Bee Gees , AC/DC and INXS , the folk-rocker Paul Kelly ( musician ) , the pop singer Kylie Minogue and Australian country music stars Slim Dusty and John Williamson .
Australian Aboriginal music is very special and very ancient : it has the famous digeridoo woodwind instrument .
Australian TV has produced many successful programs for home and overseas - including Skippy the Bush Kangaroo , Home and Away and Neighbours - and produced such well known TV stars as Barry Humphries ( `` Dame Edna Everage '' ) , Steve Irwin ( `` The Crocodile Hunter '' ) and The Wiggles .
Major Australian subgroups such as the Bogan have been shown on Australian TV in shows such as Bogan Hunters and Kath & Kim .
Australia has two public broadcasters ( the ABC and the multi-cultural SBS ) , three commercial television networks , three pay-TV services , and numerous public , non-profit television and radio stations .
Each major city has its daily newspapers , and there are two national daily newspapers , `` The Australian '' and `` The Australian Financial Review '' .
Australian movies have a very long history .
The world 's first feature movie was the Australian movie `` The Story of the Kelly Gang '' of 1906 .
In 1933 , `` In the Wake of the Bounty '' , directed by Charles Chauvel , had Errol Flynn as the main actor .
Flynn went on to a celebrated career in Hollywood .
The first Australian Oscar was won by 1942 's `` Kokoda Front Line !
`` , directed by Ken G. Hall .
In the 1970s and 1980s lots of big Australian movies and movie stars became world famous with movies like `` Picnic at Hanging Rock '' , `` Gallipoli '' ( with Mel Gibson ) , `` The Man From Snowy River '' and `` Crocodile Dundee '' .
Russell Crowe , Cate Blanchett and Heath Ledger became global stars during the 1990s and `` Australia '' starring Nicole Kidman and Hugh Jackman made a lot of money in 2008 .
Australia is also a popular destination for business conferences and research , with Sydney named as one of the top 20 meeting destinations in the world .
Sport is an important part of Australian culture because the climate is good for outdoor activities .
23.5 % Australians over the age of 15 regularly take part in organised sporting activities .
In international sports , Australia has very strong teams in cricket , hockey , netball , rugby league and rugby union , and performs well in cycling , rowing and swimming .
Local popular sports include Australian Rules Football , horse racing , soccer and motor racing .
Australia has participated in every summer Olympic Games since 1896 , and every Commonwealth Games .
Australia has hosted the 1956 and 2000 Summer Olympics , and has ranked in the top five medal-winners since 2000 .
Australia has also hosted the 1938 , 1962 , 1982 and 2006 Commonwealth Games and are to host the 2018 Commonwealth Games .
Other major international events held regularly in Australia include the Australian Open , one of the four Grand Slam tennis tournaments , annual international cricket matches and the Formula One Australian Grand Prix .
Corporate and government sponsorship of many sports and elite athletes is common in Australia .
Televised sport is popular ; some of the highest-rated television programs include the Summer Olympic Games and the grand finals of local and international football competitions .
The main sporting leagues for males are the Australian Football League , National Rugby League , A-League and NBL .
For women , they are ANZ Netball Championships , W-League and WNBL .
Famous Australian sports players include the cricketer Sir Donald Bradman , the swimmer Ian Thorpe and the athlete Cathy Freeman .
Just 60 years ago , Australia had only one big art festival .
Now Australia has hundreds of smaller community-based festivals , and national and regional festivals that focus on specific art forms .
Australia is home to many animals that can be found nowhere else on Earth , which include : the Koalas , the Kangaroos , the Wombat , the Numbat , the Emu , among many others .
Most of the marsupials in the world are found only on the continent .
American English
American English or United States English is the dialect of the English language spoken in the United States of America .
It is different in some ways from other types of English , such as British English .
Many types of American English came from local dialects in England .
Many people today know about American English even if they live in a country where another sort of English is spoken .
This may be because people hear and read American English through the media , for example movies , television , and the Internet , where the most common form of English is American English .
Because people all over the world use the English language , it gets many new words .
English has been changing in this way for hundreds of years .
For example , the many millions who speak Indian English frequently add American English words to go along with its British English base and many other words from the various Indian languages .
Sometimes people learn American English as it is spoken in America .
For example , in telephone call centers in India and other places , people often learn American English to sound more like their customers who call from America .
These people often keep using American English in everyday life .
The meaning of many words are different in American English .
Most changes in a language start with small things .
For example , Italian , Spanish , and French all came from Latin .
There are many words that sound the same in both American English and British English , but are spelled differently .
For example :
Words that come from French that end in -re in British English ( metre , centre ) end in -er in American English .
In these cases Canadian English usage is to keep the British ( and French ) spelling .
Books show that many of these differences come from the writings of English-lover Noah Webster , who made the American dictionary following the American War of Independence .
Some more differences in American English :
There are also some words in American English that are a bit different from British English , e.g .
:
General American English is the kind most spoken in mass media .
It more vigorously pronounces the letter `` R '' than some other kinds do .
`` R-dropping '' is frequent in certain places where `` r '' sound is not pronounced after a vowel .
For example as in the words `` car '' and `` card '' sounding like `` cah '' and `` cahd '' .
This occurs in the Boston area .
Aquaculture
Aquaculture is the farming of fish , shrimp , abalones , algae , and other seafood .
Aquaculture supplies fish , such as catfish , salmon , and trout .
It was developed a few thousand years ago in China .
Aquaculture supplies over 20 % of all the seafood harvested .
Fish farming has been practiced , in some parts of the world , for thousands of years .
Goldfish originated about a thousand years ago in carp farms in China , and the Roman Empire farmed oysters and other seafood .
Today , half of the seafood eaten in the U.S. is farmed .
To help meet the growing global demand for seafood , aquaculture is growing fast .
The environmental impact of fish farming varies widely , depending on the species being farmed , the methods used and where the farm is located .
When good practices are used , it 's possible to farm seafood in a way that has very little impact to the environment .
Such operations limit habitat damage , disease , escapes of farmed fish and the use of wild fish as feed .
Abbreviation
An abbreviation is a shorter way to write a word or phrase .
People use abbreviations for words that they write a lot .
The English language occasionally uses the apostrophe mark ' to show that a word is written in a shorter way , but some abbreviations do not use this mark .
More often , they use periods , especially the ones that come from the Latin language .
Common Latin abbreviations include i.e .
[ id est ] `` that is '' , e.g .
[ exempli gratia ] `` for example '' , and et al .
[ et alia ] `` and others '' .
Some new abbreviations have been created by scientists , by workers in companies and governments , and by people using the Internet .
People often think words are abbreviations when in fact they are acronyms .
Here are examples of common acronyms : The word `` radar '' is an acronym for `` Radio Detection and Ranging '' .
The name of the large computer company IBM comes from the words `` International Business Machines '' .
The name of the part of the United States government that sends rockets into outer space is NASA , from the words `` National Aeronautics and Space Administration '' .
When people using the Internet think that something is very funny , they sometimes write `` LOL '' to mean `` Laughing Out Loud '' .
People sometimes write `` ASAP '' for `` As Soon As Possible '' .
Angel
In many mythologies and religions , an angel is a good spirit .
The word angel comes from the Greek word `` angelos '' which means `` messenger '' .
Angels appear frequently in the Old Testament , the New Testament , Qur'an and Aqdas .
Angels are powerful , smart spirits that obey God 's commands and praise him with singing and they have male ( masculine ) gender , but without any sex .
They sometimes appear to humans in human form .
They can deliver messages to people in person or in dreams .
Angels that are named in the Bible are Michael ( called a `` chief prince '' ) , Gabriel ( known for telling Mary that she would be the mother of Jesus ) , and Raphael ( in the Apocryphal Book of Tobit ) .
The Ethiopian Book of Enoch also lists four Archangels which watch over the four quadrants of heaven ; Michael , Raphael , Gabriel and Uriel .
Lucifer is also known as an angel in the Bible .
Ezekiel 28:13-14
13 .
Thou hast been in Eden the garden of God ; every precious stone was thy covering , the sardius , topaz , and the diamond , the beryl , the onyx , and the jasper , the sapphire , the emerald , and the carbuncle and gold : the workmanship of thy tabrets and of thy pipes was prepared in thee in the day that thou wast created .
14 .
Thou art the anointed cherub that covereth ; and I have set thee so : thou wast upon the holy mountain of God ; thou hast walked up and down in the midst of the stones of fire .
It describes the sound of their wings , `` like the roar of rushing waters . ''
Ezekiel 10:5-7 ; Ezekiel 10:8 reveals that they have hands like a man under their wings .
Ezekiel 1:7 KJV reveals that they look like man but are different because they have `` straight feet '' and four wings and four faces .
Ezekiel ch 1 , and 10 describe the cherubim creatures ascending and descending from the earth with wheels .
Ezekiel 1:14-20 ; Ezekiel 10:16
Ezekiel 10:9-13 describes what the wheels appeared to look like , and how they moved around , how they moved or flew through the sky quickly but turned not as they went ; and how the inside workings of the wheels appeared to be `` a wheel in the midst of a wheel '' and that the color of the wheels was the color of `` Amber '' Stone .
There are four separate wheels in both accounts , one for each single cherub which is there .
They are often shown in art as having wings and a halo .
The wings represent their speed , and the halo represents their holiness .
The cherubim in art always appear as baby faced angels with very small non useful wings .
The cherubim statue or bronze casting of cherubim in the Temple of Solomon depicted them as two four winged creatures whose wings touched at the peak of the ark that they were making .
The same cherubim creatures were said to be cast in gold on top of the Ark of the Covenant .
Casting metal is one of the oldest forms of artwork , and was attempted by Leonardo da Vinci .
The study of Angels is called Angelology .
Ad hominem
Ad hominem is a Latin word for a type of argument .
It is a word often used in rhetoric .
Rhetoric is the science of speaking well , and convincing other people of your ideas .
Translated to English , `` ad hominem '' means `` against the person '' .
In other words , when someone makes an ad hominem , they are attacking the person they are arguing against , instead of what they are saying .
The term comes from the Latin word `` homo '' , which means human .
`` Hominem '' is a gender neutral version of the word `` homo '' .
In ancient Rome it referred to all free men , or in other words , all free human beings .
Ad hominem can be a way to use reputation , rumors and hearsay to change the minds of other people listening .
When a social network has already excluded or exiled one person , or applied a negative label to them , this can work more often .
It is most of the time considered to be a weak and poor argument .
In courts and in diplomacy ad hominems are not appreciated .
Ad hominems are not wrong every time .
For example , when people think that someone ca n't be trusted , things that they have said previously can be doubted .
In logic , a proof is something that starts with premises , and goes through a few logical arguments , to reach a conclusion .
In this example it can be seen that the ( completely unrelated ) fact that person A is uneducated and poor is used to prove that abortion should not be illegal .
Native American
Native Americans ( also called Aboriginal Americans , American Indians , Amerindians or indigenous peoples of America ) are the people and their descendants , who were in the Americas when Europeans arrived .
There are many different tribes of Native American people , with many different languages .
There are more than three million Native Americans in Canada and the U.S. combined .
About 51 million Native Americans live in Latin America .
Sometimes these people are called Indians , but this may be confusing , because it is the same word used for people from India .
When Christopher Columbus explored , he did not know about the Americas .
He was in the Caribbean but thought he was in the East Indies , so he called the people Indians .
Many Native Americans died after the Europeans came to the Americas .
There were diseases that came with the Europeans but were new to the Native Americans .
There were battles with the Europeans .
Many native people were hurt or killed by settlers who took their lands .
The ancestors of Native Americans came to the Americas from Asia .
Some of them may have come to America 15,000 years ago when Alaska was connected to Siberia by the Bering land bridge .
The earliest peoples in the Americas came from Siberia when there was an ice bridge across the Bering Strait .
The cold but mainly grassy plain which connected Siberia with Canada is called Beringia .
It is reckoned that a few thousand people arrived in Beringia from eastern Siberia during the Last Glacial Maximum before moving into the Americas sometime after 16,500 years before the present ( BP ) .
This would have occurred as the American glaciers blocking the way southward melted , but before the bridge was covered by the sea about 11,000 years BP .
Before European colonization , Beringia was inhabited by the Yupik peoples on both sides of the straits .
This culture remains in the region today , with others .
In 2012 , the governments of Russia and the United States announced a plan to formally establish `` a transboundary area of shared Beringian heritage '' .
Among other things this agreement would establish close ties between the Bering Land Bridge National Preserve and the Cape Krusenstern National Monument in the United States and Beringia National Park in Russia .
Native Americans are divided into many small nations , called First Nations in Canada and tribes elsewhere .
Apple
The apple tree ( `` Malus domestica '' ) is a tree that grows fruit ( such as apples ) in the rose family best known for its juicy , tasty fruit .
It is grown worldwide as a fruit tree .
It is considered to be a low-cost fruit harvestable all over the world .
The tree originated in Central Asia .
Apples have been grown for thousands of years in Asia and Europe .
They were brought to North America by European settlers .
Apples have religious and mythological significance in many cultures .
Apples are generally propagated by grafting , although wild apples grow readily from seed .
Apple trees are large if grown from seed , but small if grafted onto roots ( rootstock ) .
There are more than 7,500 known cultivars of apples , with a range of desired characteristics .
Different cultivars are bred for various tastes and uses : cooking , eating raw and cider production are the most common uses .
Trees and fruit are attacked by fungi , bacteria and pests .
In 2010 , the fruit 's genome was sequenced as part of research on disease control and selective breeding in apple production .
Worldwide production of apples in 2013 was 90.8 million tonnes .
China grew 49 % of the total .
The apple has a small , leaf-shedding tree that grows up to tall .
The apple tree has a broad crown with thick twigs .
The leaves are alternately arranged simple ovals .
They are 5 to 12 centimetres long and 3–6centimetres ( 1.2–2.4in ) wide .
It has a sharp top with a soft underside .
Blossoms come out in spring at the same time that the leaves begin to bud .
The flowers are white .
They also have a slightly pink color .
They are five petaled , and 2.5 to 3.5 centimetres ( 0.98 to 1.4 in ) in diameter .
The fruit matures in autumn .
It is usually 5 to 9 centimetres ( 2.0 to 3.5 in ) in diameter .
There are five carpels arranged in a star in the middle of the fruit .
Every carpel has one to three seeds .
The wild ancestor of apple trees is `` Malus sieversii '' .
They grow wild in the mountains of Central Asia in the north of Kazakhstan , Kyrgyzstan , Tajikistan , and Xinjiang , China , and possibly also `` Malus sylvestris '' .
Unlike domesticated apples , their leaves become red in autumn .
They are being used recently to develop `` Malus domestica '' to grow in colder climates .
The apple tree was possibly the earliest tree to be cultivated .
Its fruits have become better over thousands of years .
It is said that Alexander the Great discovered dwarf apples in Asia Minor in 300 BC .
Asia and Europe have used winter apples as an important food for thousands of years .
From when Europeans arrived , Argentina and the United States have used apples as food as well .
Apples were brought to North America in the 1600s .
The first apple orchard on the North American continent was said to be near Boston in 1625 .
In the 1900s , costly fruit industries , where the apple was a very important species , began developing .
In Norse mythology , the goddess Iðunn gives apples to the gods in `` Prose Edda '' ( written in the 13th century by Snorri Sturluson ) that makes them young forever .
English scholar H. R. Ellis Davidson suggests that apples were related to religious practices in Germanic paganism .
It was from there , she claims , that Norse paganism developed .
She points out that buckets of apples were discovered in the place of burial for the Oseberg ship in Norway .
She also remarks that fruit and nuts ( Iðunn having been described as changing into a nut in `` Skáldskaparmál '' ) have been discovered in the early graves of the Germanic peoples in England .
They have also been discovered somewhere else on the continent of Europe .
She suggests that this may have had a symbolic meaning .
Nuts are still a symbol of fertility in Southwest England .
Sometimes apples are eaten after they are cooked .
Often apples are eaten uncooked .
Apples can also be made into drinks .
Apple juice and apple cider are apple drinks .
The flesh of the fruit is firm with a taste anywhere from sour to sweet .
Apples used for cooking are sour , and need to be cooked with sugar , while other apples are sweet , and do not need cooking .
There are some seeds at the core , that can be removed with a tool that removes the core , or by carefully using a knife .
The scientific name of the apple tree genus in the Latin language is `` Malus '' .
Most apples that people grow are of the `` Malus domestica '' species .
Most apples are good to eat raw ( not cooked ) , and are also used in many kinds of baked foods , such as apple pie .
Apples are cooked until they are soft to make apple sauce .
Apples are also made into the drinks apple juice and cider .
Usually , cider contains a little alcohol , about as much as beer .
The regions of Brittany in France and Cornwall in England are known for their apple ciders .
If one wants to grow a certain type of apple it is not possible to do this by planting a seed from the wanted type .
The seed will have DNA from the apple that the seeds came from , but it will also have DNA from the apple flower that pollinated the seeds , which may well be a different type .
This means that the tree which would grow from planting would be a mixture of two .
In order to grow a certain type of apple , a small twig , or 'scion ' , is cut from the tree that grows the type of apple desired , and then added on to a specially grown stump called a rootstock .
The tree that grows will only create apples of the type needed .
There are more than 7,500 known cultivars of apples .
Different cultivars are available for temperate and subtropical climates .
One large collection of over 2,100 apple cultivars is at the National Fruit Collection in England .
Most of these cultivars are grown for eating fresh ( dessert apples ) .
However , some are grown simply for cooking or making cider .
Cider apples are usually too tart to eat immediately .
However , they give cider a rich flavor that dessert apples can not .
Most popular apple cultivars are soft but crisp .
Colorful skin , easy shipping , disease resistance , 'Red Delicious ' apple shape , and popular flavor are also needed .
Modern apples are usually sweeter than older cultivars .
This is because popular tastes in apples have become different .
Most North Americans and Europeans enjoy sweet apples .
Extremely sweet apples with hardly any acid taste are popular in Asia and India .
In the United Kingdom there are about 3000 different types of apples .
The most common apple type grown in England is the 'Bramley seedling ' , which is a popular cooking apple .
Apple orchards are not as common as they were in the early 1900s , when apples were rarely brought in from other countries .
Organizations such as Common Ground teach people about the importance of rare and local varieties of fruit .
'Apple Day ' is celebrated each October 21 in many countries .
Many apples are grown in temperate parts of the United States and Canada .
In many areas where apple growing is important , people have huge celebrations :
There are lots of different varieties of apples , including :
Apples are in the group Maloideae .
It is a subfamily of the family `` Rosaceae '' .
They are in the same subfamily as pears .
Its family is the family of rose like plants , and roses are in the family .
Abrahamic religion
An Abrahamic religion is a religion whose followers believe in the prophet Abraham and his sons/grandsons to hold an important role in human spiritual development .
The best known Abrahamic religions are Judaism , Christianity and Islam .
Smaller religious traditions sometimes included as Abrahamic religions are Samaritanism , Druze , Rastafari , Yazidi , Babism , Bahá ' í Faith .
Mandaeism , a religion holding many Abrahamic beliefs , isn ’ t categorized as one due to them believing Abraham was a false prophet
True Abrahamic religions are monotheistic ( relating to or characterized by the belief that there is only one God ) .
They also all believe that people should pray to and worship God often .
Throughout monotheistic religions , the Abrahamic religions have the world 's largest number of followers .
They are also all ethical monotheistic religions meaning they have a certain set of rules that they have to follow .
Algebra
Algebra ( from Arabic : الجبر‎ , transliterated `` al-jabr '' , meaning `` reunion of broken parts '' ) is a part of mathematics ( often called math in the United States and maths or numeracy in the United Kingdom ) .
It uses variables to represent a value that is not yet known .
When an equals sign ( = ) is used , this is called an equation .
A very simple equation using a variable is : 2 + 3 = x .
In this example , x = 5 , or it could also be said that `` x equals five '' .
This is called `` solving for x '' .
Besides equations , there are inequalities ( `` less than '' and `` greater than '' ) .
A special type of equation is called the function .
This is often used in making graphs because it always turns one input into one output .
Algebra can be used to solve real problems because the rules of algebra work in real life and numbers can be used to represent the values of real things .
Physics , engineering and computer programming are areas that use algebra all the time .
It is also useful to know in surveying , construction and business , especially accounting .
People who do algebra use the rules of numbers and mathematic operations used on numbers .
The simplest are adding , subtracting , multiplying , and dividing .
More advanced operations involve exponents , starting with squares and square roots .
Algebra was first used to solve equations and inequalities .
Two examples are linear equations ( the equation of a straight line , y=mx+b ) and quadratic equations , which has variables that are squared ( multiplied by itself , for example : 2*2 , 3*3 , or x*x ) .
Early forms of algebra were developed by the Babylonians and the Greek geometers such as Hero of Alexandria .
However the word `` algebra '' is a Latin form of the Arabic word `` Al-Jabr '' ( `` casting '' ) and comes from a mathematics book `` Al-Maqala fi Hisab-al Jabr wa-al-Muqabilah '' , ( `` Essay on the Computation of Casting and Equation '' ) written in the 9th century by a Persian mathematician , Muhammad ibn Mūsā al-Khwārizmī , who was a Muslim born in Khwarizm in Uzbekistan .
He flourished under Al-Ma'moun in Baghdad , Iraq through 813-833 AD , and died around 840 AD .
The book was brought into Europe and translated into Latin in the 12th century .
The book was then given the name 'Algebra ' .
( The ending of the mathematician 's name , al-Khwarizmi , was changed into a word easier to say in Latin , and became the English word `` algorithm '' ) .
Here is a simple example of an algebra problem :
These are the steps you can use to solve the problem :
With practice , algebra can be used when faced with a problem that is too hard to solve any other way .
Problems such as building a freeway , designing a cell phone , or finding the cure for a disease all require algebra .
As in most parts of mathematics , adding `` z '' to `` y '' ( or `` y '' plus `` z '' ) is written as `` y '' + `` z '' .
Subtracting `` z '' from `` y '' ( or `` y '' minus `` z '' ) is written as `` y '' − `` z '' .
Dividing `` y '' by `` z '' ( or `` y '' over `` z '' : formula_1 ) is written as `` y '' ÷ `` z '' or y/z .
`` y '' / '' z '' is more commonly used .
In algebra , multiplying `` y '' by `` z '' ( or `` y '' times `` z '' ) can be written in 4 ways : `` y × z '' , `` y * z '' , `` y·z '' , or just `` yz '' .
The multiplication symbol `` × '' is usually not used , because it looks too much like the letter x , which is often used as a variable .
Also , when multiplying a larger expression , parentheses can be used : `` y '' ( `` z+1 '' ) .
When we multiply a number and a letter in algebra , we write the number in front of the letter : 5 × `` y '' = 5 '' y '' .
When the number is 1 , then the 1 is not written because 1 times any number is that number ( 1 × `` y '' = `` y '' ) and so it is not needed .
As a side note , you do not have to use the letters `` x '' or `` y '' in algebra .
Variables are just symbols that mean some unknown number or value , so you can use any variable .
`` x '' and `` y '' are the most common , though .
An important part of algebra is the study of functions , since functions often appear in equations that we are trying to solve .
A function is like a machine you can put a number ( or numbers ) into and get a certain number ( or numbers ) out .
When using functions , graphs can be powerful tools in helping us to study the solutions to equations .
A graph is a picture that shows all the values of the variables that make the equation or inequality true .
Usually this is easy to make when there are only one or two variables .
The graph is often a line , and if the line does not bend or go straight up-and-down it can be described by the basic formula y = mx + b .
The variable `` b '' is the y-intercept of the graph ( where the line crosses the vertical axis ) and `` m '' is the slope or steepness of the line .
This formula applies to the coordinates of a graph , where each point on the line is written ( x , y ) .
In some math problems like the equation for a line , there can be more than one variable ( `` x '' and `` y '' in this case ) .
To find points on the line , one variable is changed .
The variable that is changed is called the `` independent '' variable .
Then the math is done to make a number .
The number that is made is called the `` dependent '' variable .
Most of the time the independent variable is written as `` x '' and the dependent variable is written as `` y '' , for example , in y = 3x + 1 .
This is often put on a graph , using an `` x '' axis ( going left and right ) and a `` y '' axis ( going up and down ) .
It can also be written in function form : f ( x ) = 3x + 1 .
So in this example , we could put in 5 for `` x '' and get y = 16 .
Put in 2 for `` x '' would get y=7 .
And 0 for `` x '' would get y=1 .
So there would be a line going thru the points ( 5,16 ) , ( 2,7 ) , and ( 0,1 ) as seen in the graph to the right .
If x has a power of 1 , it is a straight line .
If it is squared or some other power , it will be curved .
If it uses an inequality ( `` < `` or `` > '' ) , then usually part of the graph is shaded , either above or below the line .
In algebra , there are a few rules that can be used for further understanding of equations .
These are called the rules of algebra .
While these rules may seem senseless or obvious , it is wise to understand that these properties do not hold throughout all branches of mathematics .
Therefore , it will be useful to know how these axiomatic rules are declared , before taking them for granted .
Before going on to the rules , reflect on two definitions that will be given .
'Commutative ' means that a function has the same result if the numbers are swapped around .
In other words , the order of the terms in an equation do not matter .
When the operator of two terms is an addition , the 'commutative property of addition ' is applicable .
In algebraic terms , this gives formula_6 .
Note that this does not apply for subtraction !
( i.e .
formula_7 )
When the operator of two terms is an multiplication , the 'commutative property of multiplication ' is applicable .
In algebraic terms , this gives formula_8 .
Note that this does not apply for division !
( i.e .
formula_9 , when formula_10 )
'Associative ' refers to the grouping of numbers .
The associative property of addition implies that , when adding three or more terms , it does n't matter how these terms are grouped .
Algebraically , this gives formula_11 .
Note that this does not hold for subtraction , e.g .
formula_12 ( see the distributive property ) .
The associative property of multiplication implies that , when multiplying three or more terms , it does n't matter how these terms are grouped .
Algebraically , this gives formula_13 .
Note that this does not hold for division , e.g .
formula_14 .
The distributive property states that the multiplication of a number by another term can be distributed .
For instance : formula_15 .
( Do `` not `` confuse this with the associative properties !
For instance , formula_16 . )
'Identity ' refers to the property of a number that it is equal to itself .
In other words , there exists an operation of two numbers so that it equals the variable of the sum .
The additive identity property states that the sum of any number and 0 is that number : formula_17 .
This also holds for subtraction : formula_18 .
The multiplicative identity property states that the product of any number and 1 is that number : formula_19 .
This also holds for division : formula_20 .
The additive inverse property is somewhat like the opposite of the additive identity property .
When an operation is the sum of a number and its opposite , and it equals 0 , that operation is a valid algebraic operation .
Algebraically , it states the following : formula_21 .
Additive inverse of 1 is ( -1 ) .
The multiplicative inverse property entails that when an operation is the product of a number and its reciprocal , and it equals 1 , that operation is a valid algebraic operation .
Algebraically , it states the following : formula_22 .
Multiplicative inverse of 2 is 1/2 .
In addition to `` elementary algebra '' , or basic algebra , there are advanced forms of algebra , taught in colleges and universities , such as abstract algebra , linear algebra , and universal algebra .
This includes how to use a matrix to solve many linear equations at once .
`` Abstract algebra '' is the study of things that are found in equations , going beyond numbers to the more abstract with groups of numbers .
Many math problems are about physics and engineering .
In many of these physics problems time is a variable .
Time uses the letter `` t '' .
Using the basic ideas in algebra can help reduce a math problem to its simplest form making it easier to solve difficult problems .
Energy is `` e '' , force is `` f '' , mass is `` m '' , acceleration is `` a '' and speed of light is sometimes `` c '' .
This is used in some famous equations , like f = ma and e=mc^2 ( although more complex math beyond algebra was needed to come up with that last equation ) .
Atom
The atom is the basic unit of matter .
It is the smallest thing that can have a chemical property .
There are many different types of atoms , each with its own name , atomic mass and size .
These different atoms are called chemical elements .
The chemical elements are organized on the periodic table .
Examples of elements are hydrogen and gold .
Atoms are very small , but the exact size depends on the element .
Atoms range from 0.1 to 0.5 nanometers in width .
One nanometer is about 100,000 times smaller than the width of a human hair .
This makes atoms impossible to see without special tools .
Scientists use experiments to learn how they work and interact with other atoms .
Atoms join together to make molecules : for example , two hydrogen atoms and one oxygen atom combine to make a water molecule .
When atoms join together it is called a chemical reaction .
Atoms are made up of three kinds of smaller particles , called protons ( which are positively charged ) , neutrons ( which have no charge ) and electrons ( which are negatively charged ) .
The protons and neutrons are heavier , and stay in the middle of the atom .
They are called the nucleus .
They are surrounded by a cloud of electrons which are very lightweight .
They are attracted to the positive charge of the nucleus by the electromagnetic force .
The number of protons and electrons an atom has tells us what element it is .
Hydrogen , for example , has one proton and one electron ; the element sulfur has 16 protons and 16 electrons .
The number of protons is the atomic number .
Except for hydrogen , the nucleus also has neutrons .
The number of protons and neutrons together is the atomic weight .
Atoms move faster when they are in their gas form ( because they are free to move ) than they do in liquid form and solid matter .
In solid materials , the atoms are tightly packed next to each other so they vibrate , but are not able to move ( there is no room ) as atoms in liquids do .
The word `` atom '' comes from the Greek ( ἀτόμος ) `` atomos '' , `` indivisible '' , from ( ἀ ) - , `` not , '' and τόμος , `` a cut . ''
The first historical mention of the word atom came from works by the Greek philosopher Democritus , around 400 BC .
Atomic theory stayed as a mostly philosophical subject , with not much actual scientific investigation or study , until the development of chemistry in the 1650s .
In 1777 French chemist Antoine Lavoisier defined the term `` element '' for the first time .
He said that an element was any basic substance that could not be broken down into other substances by the methods of chemistry .
Any substance that could be broken down was a `` compound '' .
In 1803 , English philosopher John Dalton suggested that elements were tiny , solid balls made of atoms .
Dalton believed that all atoms of the same element have the same mass .
He said that compounds are formed when atoms of more than one element combine .
According to Dalton , in a certain compound , the atoms of the compound 's elements always combine the same way .
In 1827 , British scientist Robert Brown looked at pollen grains in water under his microscope .
The pollen grains appeared to be jiggling .
Brown used Dalton 's atomic theory to describe patterns in the way they moved .
This was called `` brownian motion '' .
In 1905 Albert Einstein used mathematics to prove that the seemingly random movements were caused by the reactions of atoms , and by doing this he conclusively proved the existence of the atom .
In 1869 scientist Dmitri Mendeleev published the first version of the periodic table .
The periodic table groups elements by their atomic number ( how many protons they have .
This is usually the same as the number of electrons ) .
Elements in the same column , or period , usually have similar properties .
For example , helium , neon , argon , krypton and xenon are all in the same column and have very similar properties .
All these elements are gases that have no colour and no smell .
Also , they are unable to combine with other atoms to form compounds .
Together they are known as the noble gases .
The physicist J.J. Thomson was the first person to discover electrons .
This happened while he was working with cathode rays in 1897 .
He realized they had a negative charge , unlike protons ( positive ) and neutrons ( no charge ) .
Thomson created the plum pudding model , which stated that an atom was like plum pudding : the dried fruit ( electrons ) were stuck in a mass of pudding ( protons ) .
In 1909 , a scientist named Ernest Rutherford used the Geiger–Marsden experiment to prove that most of an atom is in a very small space called the atomic nucleus .
Rutherford took a photo plate and covered it with gold foil , and then shot alpha particles ( made of two protons and two neutrons stuck together ) at it .
Many of the particles went through the gold foil , which proved that atoms are mostly empty space .
Electrons are so small they make up only 1 % of an atom 's mass .
In 1913 , Niels Bohr introduced the Bohr model .
This model showed that electrons travel around the nucleus in fixed circular orbits .
This was more accurate than the Rutherford model .
However , it was still not completely right .
Improvements to the Bohr model have been made since it was first introduced .
In 1925 , chemist Frederick Soddy found that some elements in the periodic table had more than one kind of atom .
For example , any atom with 2 protons should be a helium atom .
Usually , a helium nucleus also contains two neutrons .
However , some helium atoms have only one neutron .
This means they truly are helium , because an element is defined by the number of protons , but they are not normal helium , either .
Soddy called an atom like this , with a different number of neutrons , an `` isotope '' .
To get the name of the isotope we look at how many protons and neutrons it has in its nucleus and add this to the name of the element .
So a helium atom with two protons and one neutron is called helium-3 , and a carbon atom with six protons and six neutrons is called carbon-12 .
However , when he developed his theory Soddy could not be certain neutrons actually existed .
To prove they were real , physicist James Chadwick and a team of others created the mass spectrometer .
The mass spectrometer actually measures the mass and weight of individual atoms .
By doing this Chadwick proved that to account for all the weight of the atom , neutrons must exist .